
One summer Paul took Steve to Wisconsin to visit the family¡¯s dairy farm. Rural life did not appeal to Steve, but one image stuck with him. He saw a calf being born, and he was amazed when the tiny animal struggled up within minutes and began to walk. ¡°It was not something she had learned, but it was instead hardwired into her,¡± he recalled. ¡°A human baby couldn¡¯t do that. I found it remarkable, even though no one else did.¡± He put it in hardware-software terms: ¡°It was as if something in the animal¡¯s body and in its brain had been engineered to work together instantly rather than being learned.¡±

In ninth grade Jobs went to Homestead High, which had a sprawling campus of two-story cinderblock buildings painted pink that served two thousand students. ¡°It was designed by a famous prison architect,¡± Jobs recalled. ¡°They wanted to make it indestructible.¡± He had developed a love of walking, and he walked the fifteen blocks to school by himself each day.

He had few friends his own age, but he got to know some seniors who were immersed in the counterculture of the late 1960s. It was a time when the geek and hippie worlds were beginning to show some overlap. ¡°My friends were the really smart kids,¡± he said. ¡°I was interested in math and science and electronics. They were too, and also into LSD and the whole counterculture trip.¡±

His pranks by then typically involved electronics. At one point he wired his house with speakers. But since speakers can also be used as microphones, he built a control room in his closet, where he could listen in on what was happening in other rooms. One night, when he had his headphones on and was listening in on his parents¡¯ bedroom, his father caught him and angrily demanded that he dismantle the system. He spent many evenings visiting the garage of Larry Lang, the engineer who lived down the street from his old house. Lang eventually gave Jobs the carbon microphone that had fascinated him, and he turned him on to Heathkits, those assemble-it-yourself kits for making ham radios and other electronic gear that were beloved by the soldering set back then. ¡°Heathkits came with all the boards and parts color-coded, but the manual also explained the theory of how it operated,¡± Jobs recalled. ¡°It made you realize you could build and understand anything. Once you built a couple of radios, you¡¯d see a TV in the catalogue and say, ¡®I can build that as well,¡¯ even if you didn¡¯t. I was very lucky, because when I was a kid both my dad and the Heathkits made me believe I could build anything.¡±

Lang also got him into the Hewlett-Packard Explorers Club, a group of fifteen or so students who met in the company cafeteria on Tuesday nights. ¡°They would get an engineer from one of the labs to come and talk about what he was working on,¡± Jobs recalled. ¡°My dad would drive me there. I was in heaven. HP was a pioneer of light-emitting diodes. So we talked about what to do with them.¡± Because his father now worked for a laser company, that topic particularly interested him. One night he cornered one of HP¡¯s laser engineers after a talk and got a tour of the holography lab. But the most lasting impression came from seeing the small computers the company was developing. ¡°I saw my first desktop computer there. It was called the 9100A, and it was a glorified calculator but also really the first desktop computer. It was huge, maybe forty pounds, but it was a beauty of a thing. I fell in love with it.¡±

The kids in the Explorers Club were encouraged to do projects, and Jobs decided to build a frequency counter, which measures the number of pulses per second in an electronic signal. He needed some parts that HP made, so he picked up the phone and called the CEO. ¡°Back then, people didn¡¯t have unlisted numbers. So I looked up Bill Hewlett in Palo Alto and called him at home. And he answered and chatted with me for twenty minutes. He got me the parts, but he also got me a job in the plant where they made frequency counters.¡± Jobs worked there the summer after his freshman year at Homestead High. ¡°My dad would drive me in the morning and pick me up in the evening.¡±

His work mainly consisted of ¡°just putting nuts and bolts on things¡± on an assembly line. There was some resentment among his fellow line workers toward the pushy kid who had talked his way in by calling the CEO. ¡°I remember telling one of the supervisors, ¡®I love this stuff, I love this stuff,¡¯ and then I asked him what he liked to do best. And he said, ¡®To fuck, to fuck.¡¯¡± Jobs had an easier time ingratiating himself with the engineers who worked one floor above. ¡°They served doughnuts and coffee every morning at ten. So I¡¯d go upstairs and hang out with them.¡±

Jobs liked to work. He also had a newspaper route¡ªhis father would drive him when it was raining¡ªand during his sophomore year spent weekends and the summer as a stock clerk at a cavernous electronics store, Haltek. It was to electronics what his father¡¯s junkyards were to auto parts: a scavenger¡¯s paradise sprawling over an entire city block with new, used, salvaged, and surplus components crammed onto warrens of shelves, dumped unsorted into bins, and piled in an outdoor yard. ¡°Out in the back, near the bay, they had a fenced-in area with things like Polaris submarine interiors that had been ripped and sold for salvage,¡± he recalled. ¡°All the controls and buttons were right there. The colors were military greens and grays, but they had these switches and bulb covers of amber and red. There were these big old lever switches that, when you flipped them, it was awesome, like you were blowing up Chicago.¡±

At the wooden counters up front, laden with thick catalogues in tattered binders, people would haggle for switches, resistors, capacitors, and sometimes the latest memory chips. His father used to do that for auto parts, and he succeeded because he knew the value of each better than the clerks. Jobs followed suit. He developed a knowledge of electronic parts that was honed by his love of negotiating and turning a profit. He would go to electronic flea markets, such as the San Jose swap meet, haggle for a used circuit board that contained some valuable chips or components, and then sell those to his manager at Haltek.

Jobs was able to get his first car, with his father¡¯s help, when he was fifteen. It was a two-tone Nash Metropolitan that his father had fitted out with an MG engine. Jobs didn¡¯t really like it, but he did not want to tell his father that, or miss out on the chance to have his own car. ¡°In retrospect, a Nash Metropolitan might seem like the most wickedly cool car,¡± he later said. ¡°But at the time it was the most uncool car in the world. Still, it was a car, so that was great.¡± Within a year he had saved up enough from his various jobs that he could trade up to a red Fiat 850 coupe with an Abarth engine. ¡°My dad helped me buy and inspect it. The satisfaction of getting paid and saving up for something, that was very exciting.¡±

That same summer, between his sophomore and junior years at Homestead, Jobs began smoking marijuana. ¡°I got stoned for the first time that summer. I was fifteen, and then began using pot regularly.¡± At one point his father found some dope in his son¡¯s Fiat. ¡°What¡¯s this?¡± he asked. Jobs coolly replied, ¡°That¡¯s marijuana.¡± It was one of the few times in his life that he faced his father¡¯s anger. ¡°That was the only real fight I ever got in with my dad,¡± he said. But his father again bent to his will. ¡°He wanted me to promise that I¡¯d never use pot again, but I wouldn¡¯t promise.¡± In fact by his senior year he was also dabbling in LSD and hash as well as exploring the mind-bending effects of sleep deprivation. ¡°I was starting to get stoned a bit more. We would also drop acid occasionally, usually in fields or in cars.¡±

He also flowered intellectually during his last two years in high school and found himself at the intersection, as he had begun to see it, of those who were geekily immersed in electronics and those who were into literature and creative endeavors. ¡°I started to listen to music a whole lot, and I started to read more outside of just science and technology¡ªShakespeare, Plato. I loved King Lear.¡± His other favorites included Moby-Dick and the poems of Dylan Thomas. I asked him why he related to King Lear and Captain Ahab, two of the most willful and driven characters in literature, but he didn¡¯t respond to the connection I was making, so I let it drop. ¡°When I was a senior I had this phenomenal AP English class. The teacher was this guy who looked like Ernest Hemingway. He took a bunch of us snowshoeing in Yosemite.¡±

One course that Jobs took would become part of Silicon Valley lore: the electronics class taught by John McCollum, a former Navy pilot who had a showman¡¯s flair for exciting his students with such tricks as firing up a Tesla coil. His little stockroom, to which he would lend the key to pet students, was crammed with transistors and other components he had scored.

McCollum¡¯s classroom was in a shed-like building on the edge of the campus, next to the parking lot. ¡°This is where it was,¡± Jobs recalled as he peered in the window, ¡°and here, next door, is where the auto shop class used to be.¡± The juxtaposition highlighted the shift from the interests of his father¡¯s generation. ¡°Mr. McCollum felt that electronics class was the new auto shop.¡±

McCollum believed in military discipline and respect for authority. Jobs didn¡¯t. His aversion to authority was something he no longer tried to hide, and he affected an attitude that combined wiry and weird intensity with aloof rebelliousness. McCollum later said, ¡°He was usually off in a corner doing something on his own and really didn¡¯t want to have much of anything to do with either me or the rest of the class.¡± He never trusted Jobs with a key to the stockroom. One day Jobs needed a part that was not available, so he made a collect call to the manufacturer, Burroughs in Detroit, and said he was designing a new product and wanted to test out the part. It arrived by air freight a few days later. When McCollum asked how he had gotten it, Jobs described¡ªwith defiant pride¡ªthe collect call and the tale he had told. ¡°I was furious,¡± McCollum said. ¡°That was not the way I wanted my students to behave.¡± Jobs¡¯s response was, ¡°I don¡¯t have the money for the phone call. They¡¯ve got plenty of money.¡±

Jobs took McCollum¡¯s class for only one year, rather than the three that it was offered. For one of his projects, he made a device with a photocell that would switch on a circuit when exposed to light, something any high school science student could have done. He was far more interested in playing with lasers, something he learned from his father. With a few friends, he created light shows for parties by bouncing lasers off mirrors that were attached to the speakers of his stereo system



CHAPTER TWO

ODD COUPLE



The Two Steves







Jobs and Wozniak in the garage, 1976



Woz

While a student in McCollum¡¯s class, Jobs became friends with a graduate who was the teacher¡¯s all-time favorite and a school legend for his wizardry in the class. Stephen Wozniak, whose younger brother had been on a swim team with Jobs, was almost five years older than Jobs and far more knowledgeable about electronics. But emotionally and socially he was still a high school geek.

Like Jobs, Wozniak learned a lot at his father¡¯s knee. But their lessons were different. Paul Jobs was a high school dropout who, when fixing up cars, knew how to turn a tidy profit by striking the right deal on parts. Francis Wozniak, known as Jerry, was a brilliant engineering graduate from Cal Tech, where he had quarterbacked the football team, who became a rocket scientist at Lockheed. He exalted engineering and looked down on those in business, marketing, and sales. ¡°I remember him telling me that engineering was the highest level of importance you could reach in the world,¡± Steve Wozniak later recalled. ¡°It takes society to a new level.¡±

One of Steve Wozniak¡¯s first memories was going to his father¡¯s workplace on a weekend and being shown electronic parts, with his dad ¡°putting them on a table with me so I got to play with them.¡± He watched with fascination as his father tried to get a waveform line on a video screen to stay flat so he could show that one of his circuit designs was working properly. ¡°I could see that whatever my dad was doing, it was important and good.¡± Woz, as he was known even then, would ask about the resistors and transistors lying around the house, and his father would pull out a blackboard to illustrate what they did. ¡°He would explain what a resistor was by going all the way back to atoms and electrons. He explained how resistors worked when I was in second grade, not by equations but by having me picture it.¡±

Woz¡¯s father taught him something else that became ingrained in his childlike, socially awkward personality: Never lie. ¡°My dad believed in honesty. Extreme honesty. That¡¯s the biggest thing he taught me. I never lie, even to this day.¡± (The only partial exception was in the service of a good practical joke.) In addition, he imbued his son with an aversion to extreme ambition, which set Woz apart from Jobs. At an Apple product launch event in 2010, forty years after they met, Woz reflected on their differences. ¡°My father told me, ¡®You always want to be in the middle,¡¯¡± he said. ¡°I didn¡¯t want to be up with the high-level people like Steve. My dad was an engineer, and that¡¯s what I wanted to be. I was way too shy ever to be a business leader like Steve.¡±

By fourth grade Wozniak became, as he put it, one of the ¡°electronics kids.¡± He had an easier time making eye contact with a transistor than with a girl, and he developed the chunky and stooped look of a guy who spends most of his time hunched over circuit boards. At the same age when Jobs was puzzling over a carbon microphone that his dad couldn¡¯t explain, Wozniak was using transistors to build an intercom system featuring amplifiers, relays, lights, and buzzers that connected the kids¡¯ bedrooms of six houses in the neighborhood. And at an age when Jobs was building Heathkits, Wozniak was assembling a transmitter and receiver from Hallicrafters, the most sophisticated radios available.

Woz spent a lot of time at home reading his father¡¯s electronics journals, and he became enthralled by stories about new computers, such as the powerful ENIAC. Because Boolean algebra came naturally to him, he marveled at how simple, rather than complex, the computers were. In eighth grade he built a calculator that included one hundred transistors, two hundred diodes, and two hundred resistors on ten circuit boards. It won top prize in a local contest run by the Air Force, even though the competitors included students through twelfth grade.

Woz became more of a loner when the boys his age began going out with girls and partying, endeavors that he found far more complex than designing circuits. ¡°Where before I was popular and riding bikes and everything, suddenly I was socially shut out,¡± he recalled. ¡°It seemed like nobody spoke to me for the longest time.¡± He found an outlet by playing juvenile pranks. In twelfth grade he built an electronic metronome¡ªone of those tick-tick-tick devices that keep time in music class¡ªand realized it sounded like a bomb. So he took the labels off some big batteries, taped them together, and put it in a school locker; he rigged it to start ticking faster when the locker opened. Later that day he got called to the principal¡¯s office. He thought it was because he had won, yet again, the school¡¯s top math prize. Instead he was confronted by the police. The principal had been summoned when the device was found, bravely ran onto the football field clutching it to his chest, and pulled the wires off. Woz tried and failed to suppress his laughter. He actually got sent to the juvenile detention center, where he spent the night. It was a memorable experience. He taught the other prisoners how to disconnect the wires leading to the ceiling fans and connect them to the bars so people got shocked when touching them.

Getting shocked was a badge of honor for Woz. He prided himself on being a hardware engineer, which meant that random shocks were routine. He once devised a roulette game where four people put their thumbs in a slot; when the ball landed, one would get shocked. ¡°Hardware guys will play this game, but software guys are too chicken,¡± he noted.

During his senior year he got a part-time job at Sylvania and had the chance to work on a computer for the first time. He learned FORTRAN from a book and read the manuals for most of the systems of the day, starting with the Digital Equipment PDP-8. Then he studied the specs for the latest microchips and tried to redesign the computers using these newer parts. The challenge he set himself was to replicate the design using the fewest components possible. Each night he would try to improve his drawing from the night before. By the end of his senior year, he had become a master. ¡°I was now designing computers with half the number of chips the actual company had in their own design, but only on paper.¡± He never told his friends. After all, most seventeen-year-olds were getting their kicks in other ways.

On Thanksgiving weekend of his senior year, Wozniak visited the University of Colorado. It was closed for the holiday, but he found an engineering student who took him on a tour of the labs. He begged his father to let him go there, even though the out-of-state tuition was more than the family could easily afford. They struck a deal: He would be allowed to go for one year, but then he would transfer to De Anza Community College back home. After arriving at Colorado in the fall of 1969, he spent so much time playing pranks (such as producing reams of printouts saying ¡°Fuck Nixon¡±) that he failed a couple of his courses and was put on probation. In addition, he created a program to calculate Fibonacci numbers that burned up so much computer time the university threatened to bill him for the cost. So he readily lived up to his bargain with his parents and transferred to De Anza.

After a pleasant year at De Anza, Wozniak took time off to make some money. He found work at a company that made computers for the California Motor Vehicle Department, and a coworker made him a wonderful offer: He would provide some spare chips so Wozniak could make one of the computers he had been sketching on paper. Wozniak decided to use as few chips as possible, both as a personal challenge and because he did not want to take advantage of his colleague¡¯s largesse.

Much of the work was done in the garage of a friend just around the corner, Bill Fernandez, who was still at Homestead High. To lubricate their efforts, they drank large amounts of Cragmont cream soda, riding their bikes to the Sunnyvale Safeway to return the bottles, collect the deposits, and buy more. ¡°That¡¯s how we started referring to it as the Cream Soda Computer,¡± Wozniak recalled. It was basically a calculator capable of multiplying numbers entered by a set of switches and displaying the results in binary code with little lights.

When it was finished, Fernandez told Wozniak there was someone at Homestead High he should meet. ¡°His name is Steve. He likes to do pranks like you do, and he¡¯s also into building electronics like you are.¡± It may have been the most significant meeting in a Silicon Valley garage since Hewlett went into Packard¡¯s thirty-two years earlier. ¡°Steve and I just sat on the sidewalk in front of Bill¡¯s house for the longest time, just sharing stories¡ªmostly about pranks we¡¯d pulled, and also what kind of electronic designs we¡¯d done,¡± Wozniak recalled. ¡°We had so much in common. Typically, it was really hard for me to explain to people what kind of design stuff I worked on, but Steve got it right away. And I liked him. He was kind of skinny and wiry and full of energy.¡± Jobs was also impressed. ¡°Woz was the first person I¡¯d met who knew more electronics than I did,¡± he once said, stretching his own expertise. ¡°I liked him right away. I was a little more mature than my years, and he was a little less mature than his, so it evened out. Woz was very bright, but emotionally he was my age.¡±

In addition to their interest in computers, they shared a passion for music. ¡°It was an incredible time for music,¡± Jobs recalled. ¡°It was like living at a time when Beethoven and Mozart were alive. Really. People will look back on it that way. And Woz and I were deeply into it.¡± In particular, Wozniak turned Jobs on to the glories of Bob Dylan. ¡°We tracked down this guy in Santa Cruz who put out this newsletter on Dylan,¡± Jobs said. ¡°Dylan taped all of his concerts, and some of the people around him were not scrupulous, because soon there were tapes all around. Bootlegs of everything. And this guy had them all.¡±

Hunting down Dylan tapes soon became a joint venture. ¡°The two of us would go tramping through San Jose and Berkeley and ask about Dylan bootlegs and collect them,¡± said Wozniak. ¡°We¡¯d buy brochures of Dylan lyrics and stay up late interpreting them. Dylan¡¯s words struck chords of creative thinking.¡± Added Jobs, ¡°I had more than a hundred hours, including every concert on the ¡¯65 and ¡¯66 tour,¡± the one where Dylan went electric. Both of them bought high-end TEAC reel-to-reel tape decks. ¡°I would use mine at a low speed to record many concerts on one tape,¡± said Wozniak. Jobs matched his obsession: ¡°Instead of big speakers I bought a pair of awesome headphones and would just lie in my bed and listen to that stuff for hours.¡±

Jobs had formed a club at Homestead High to put on music-and-light shows and also play pranks. (They once glued a gold-painted toilet seat onto a flower planter.) It was called the Buck Fry Club, a play on the name of the principal. Even though they had already graduated, Wozniak and his friend Allen Baum joined forces with Jobs, at the end of his junior year, to produce a farewell gesture for the departing seniors. Showing off the Homestead campus four decades later, Jobs paused at the scene of the escapade and pointed. ¡°See that balcony? That¡¯s where we did the banner prank that sealed our friendship.¡± On a big bedsheet Baum had tie-dyed with the school¡¯s green and white colors, they painted a huge hand flipping the middle-finger salute. Baum¡¯s nice Jewish mother helped them draw it and showed them how to do the shading and shadows to make it look more real. ¡°I know what that is,¡± she snickered. They devised a system of ropes and pulleys so that it could be dramatically lowered as the graduating class marched past the balcony, and they signed it ¡°SWAB JOB,¡± the initials of Wozniak and Baum combined with part of Jobs¡¯s name. The prank became part of school lore¡ªand got Jobs suspended one more time.

Another prank involved a pocket device Wozniak built that could emit TV signals. He would take it to a room where a group of people were watching TV, such as in a dorm, and secretly press the button so that the screen would get fuzzy with static. When someone got up and whacked the set, Wozniak would let go of the button and the picture would clear up. Once he had the unsuspecting viewers hopping up and down at his will, he would make things harder. He would keep the picture fuzzy until someone touched the antenna. Eventually he would make people think they had to hold the antenna while standing on one foot or touching the top of the set. Years later, at a keynote presentation where he was having his own trouble getting a video to work, Jobs broke from his script and recounted the fun they had with the device. ¡°Woz would have it in his pocket and we¡¯d go into a dorm . . . where a bunch of folks would be, like, watching Star Trek, and he¡¯d screw up the TV, and someone would go up to fix it, and just as they had the foot off the ground he would turn it back on, and as they put their foot back on the ground he¡¯d screw it up again.¡± Contorting himself into a pretzel onstage, Jobs concluded to great laughter, ¡°And within five minutes he would have someone like this.¡±

The Blue Box

The ultimate combination of pranks and electronics¡ªand the escapade that helped to create Apple¡ªwas launched one Sunday afternoon when Wozniak read an article in Esquire that his mother had left for him on the kitchen table. It was September 1971, and he was about to drive off the next day to Berkeley, his third college. The story, Ron Rosenbaum¡¯s ¡°Secrets of the Little Blue Box,¡± described how hackers and phone phreakers had found ways to make long-distance calls for free by replicating the tones that routed signals on the AT&T network. ¡°Halfway through the article, I had to call my best friend, Steve Jobs, and read parts of this long article to him,¡± Wozniak recalled. He knew that Jobs, then beginning his senior year, was one of the few people who would share his excitement.

A hero of the piece was John Draper, a hacker known as Captain Crunch because he had discovered that the sound emitted by the toy whistle that came with the breakfast cereal was the same 2600 Hertz tone used by the phone network¡¯s call-routing switches. It could fool the system into allowing a long-distance call to go through without extra charges. The article revealed that other tones that served to route calls could be found in an issue of the Bell System Technical Journal, which AT&T immediately began asking libraries to pull from their shelves.

As soon as Jobs got the call from Wozniak that Sunday afternoon, he knew they would have to get their hands on the technical journal right away. ¡°Woz picked me up a few minutes later, and we went to the library at SLAC [the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center] to see if we could find it,¡± Jobs recounted. It was Sunday and the library was closed, but they knew how to get in through a door that was rarely locked. ¡°I remember that we were furiously digging through the stacks, and it was Woz who finally found the journal with all the frequencies. It was like, holy shit, and we opened it and there it was. We kept saying to ourselves, ¡®It¡¯s real. Holy shit, it¡¯s real.¡¯ It was all laid out¡ªthe tones, the frequencies.¡±

Wozniak went to Sunnyvale Electronics before it closed that evening and bought the parts to make an analog tone generator. Jobs had built a frequency counter when he was part of the HP Explorers Club, and they used it to calibrate the desired tones. With a dial, they could replicate and tape-record the sounds specified in the article. By midnight they were ready to test it. Unfortunately the oscillators they used were not quite stable enough to replicate the right chirps to fool the phone company. ¡°We could see the instability using Steve¡¯s frequency counter,¡± recalled Wozniak, ¡°and we just couldn¡¯t make it work. I had to leave for Berkeley the next morning, so we decided I would work on building a digital version once I got there.¡±

No one had ever created a digital version of a Blue Box, but Woz was made for the challenge. Using diodes and transistors from Radio Shack, and with the help of a music student in his dorm who had perfect pitch, he got it built before Thanksgiving. ¡°I have never designed a circuit I was prouder of,¡± he said. ¡°I still think it was incredible.¡±

One night Wozniak drove down from Berkeley to Jobs¡¯s house to try it. They attempted to call Wozniak¡¯s uncle in Los Angeles, but they got a wrong number. It didn¡¯t matter; their device had worked. ¡°Hi! We¡¯re calling you for free! We¡¯re calling you for free!¡± Wozniak shouted. The person on the other end was confused and annoyed. Jobs chimed in, ¡°We¡¯re calling from California! From California! With a Blue Box.¡± This probably baffled the man even more, since he was also in California.

At first the Blue Box was used for fun and pranks. The most daring of these was when they called the Vatican and Wozniak pretended to be Henry Kissinger wanting to speak to the pope. ¡°Ve are at de summit meeting in Moscow, and ve need to talk to de pope,¡± Woz intoned. He was told that it was 5:30 a.m. and the pope was sleeping. When he called back, he got a bishop who was supposed to serve as the translator. But they never actually got the pope on the line. ¡°They realized that Woz wasn¡¯t Henry Kissinger,¡± Jobs recalled. ¡°We were at a public phone booth.¡±

It was then that they reached an important milestone, one that would establish a pattern in their partnerships: Jobs came up with the idea that the Blue Box could be more than merely a hobby; they could build and sell them. ¡°I got together the rest of the components, like the casing and power supply and keypads, and figured out how we could price it,¡± Jobs said, foreshadowing roles he would play when they founded Apple. The finished product was about the size of two decks of playing cards. The parts cost about $40, and Jobs decided they should sell it for $150.

Following the lead of other phone phreaks such as Captain Crunch, they gave themselves handles. Wozniak became ¡°Berkeley Blue,¡± Jobs was ¡°Oaf Tobark.¡± They took the device to college dorms and gave demonstrations by attaching it to a phone and speaker. While the potential customers watched, they would call the Ritz in London or a dial-a-joke service in Australia. ¡°We made a hundred or so Blue Boxes and sold almost all of them,¡± Jobs recalled.

The fun and profits came to an end at a Sunnyvale pizza parlor. Jobs and Wozniak were about to drive to Berkeley with a Blue Box they had just finished making. Jobs needed money and was eager to sell, so he pitched the device to some guys at the next table. They were interested, so Jobs went to a phone booth and demonstrated it with a call to Chicago. The prospects said they had to go to their car for money. ¡°So we walk over to the car, Woz and me, and I¡¯ve got the Blue Box in my hand, and the guy gets in, reaches under the seat, and he pulls out a gun,¡± Jobs recounted. He had never been that close to a gun, and he was terrified. ¡°So he¡¯s pointing the gun right at my stomach, and he says, ¡®Hand it over, brother.¡¯ My mind raced. There was the car door here, and I thought maybe I could slam it on his legs and we could run, but there was this high probability that he would shoot me. So I slowly handed it to him, very carefully.¡± It was a weird sort of robbery. The guy who took the Blue Box actually gave Jobs a phone number and said he would try to pay for it if it worked. When Jobs later called the number, the guy said he couldn¡¯t figure out how to use it. So Jobs, in his felicitous way, convinced the guy to meet him and Wozniak at a public place. But they ended up deciding not to have another encounter with the gunman, even on the off chance they could get their $150.

The partnership paved the way for what would be a bigger adventure together. ¡°If it hadn¡¯t been for the Blue Boxes, there wouldn¡¯t have been an Apple,¡± Jobs later reflected. ¡°I¡¯m 100% sure of that. Woz and I learned how to work together, and we gained the confidence that we could solve technical problems and actually put something into production.¡± They had created a device with a little circuit board that could control billions of dollars¡¯ worth of infrastructure. ¡°You cannot believe how much confidence that gave us.¡± Woz came to the same conclusion: ¡°It was probably a bad idea selling them, but it gave us a taste of what we could do with my engineering skills and his vision.¡± The Blue Box adventure established a template for a partnership that would soon be born. Wozniak would be the gentle wizard coming up with a neat invention that he would have been happy just to give away, and Jobs would figure out how to make it user-friendly, put it together in a package, market it, and make a few bucks.
