
Jobs called Fadell, Rubinstein, and Schiller to a secret meeting in the design studio conference room, where Ive gave a demonstration of multi-touch. ¡°Wow!¡± said Fadell. Everyone liked it, but they were not sure that they would be able to make it work on a mobile phone. They decided to proceed on two paths: P1 was the code name for the phone being developed using an iPod trackwheel, and P2 was the new alternative using a multi-touch screen.

A small company in Delaware called FingerWorks was already making a line of multi-touch trackpads. Founded by two academics at the University of Delaware, John Elias and Wayne Westerman, FingerWorks had developed some tablets with multi-touch sensing capabilities and taken out patents on ways to translate various finger gestures, such as pinches and swipes, into useful functions. In early 2005 Apple quietly acquired the company, all of its patents, and the services of its two founders. FingerWorks quit selling its products to others, and it began filing its new patents in Apple¡¯s name.

After six months of work on the trackwheel P1 and the multi-touch P2 phone options, Jobs called his inner circle into his conference room to make a decision. Fadell had been trying hard to develop the trackwheel model, but he admitted they had not cracked the problem of figuring out a simple way to dial calls. The multi-touch approach was riskier, because they were unsure whether they could execute the engineering, but it was also more exciting and promising. ¡°We all know this is the one we want to do,¡± said Jobs, pointing to the touchscreen. ¡°So let¡¯s make it work.¡± It was what he liked to call a bet-the-company moment, high risk and high reward if it succeeded.

A couple of members of the team argued for having a keyboard as well, given the popularity of the BlackBerry, but Jobs vetoed the idea. A physical keyboard would take away space from the screen, and it would not be as flexible and adaptable as a touchscreen keyboard. ¡°A hardware keyboard seems like an easy solution, but it¡¯s constraining,¡± he said. ¡°Think of all the innovations we¡¯d be able to adapt if we did the keyboard onscreen with software. Let¡¯s bet on it, and then we¡¯ll find a way to make it work.¡± The result was a device that displays a numerical pad when you want to dial a phone number, a typewriter keyboard when you want to write, and whatever buttons you might need for each particular activity. And then they all disappear when you¡¯re watching a video. By having software replace hardware, the interface became fluid and flexible.

Jobs spent part of every day for six months helping to refine the display. ¡°It was the most complex fun I¡¯ve ever had,¡± he recalled. ¡°It was like being the one evolving the variations on ¡®Sgt. Pepper.¡¯¡± A lot of features that seem simple now were the result of creative brainstorms. For example, the team worried about how to prevent the device from playing music or making a call accidentally when it was jangling in your pocket. Jobs was congenitally averse to having on-off switches, which he deemed ¡°inelegant.¡± The solution was ¡°Swipe to Open,¡± the simple and fun on-screen slider that activated the device when it had gone dormant. Another breakthrough was the sensor that figured out when you put the phone to your ear, so that your lobes didn¡¯t accidentally activate some function. And of course the icons came in his favorite shape, the primitive he made Bill Atkinson design into the software of the first Macintosh: rounded rectangles. In session after session, with Jobs immersed in every detail, the team members figured out ways to simplify what other phones made complicated. They added a big bar to guide you in putting calls on hold or making conference calls, found easy ways to navigate through email, and created icons you could scroll through horizontally to get to different apps¡ªall of which were easier because they could be used visually on the screen rather than by using a keyboard built into the hardware.

Gorilla Glass

Jobs became infatuated with different materials the way he did with certain foods. When he went back to Apple in 1997 and started work on the iMac, he had embraced what could be done with translucent and colored plastic. The next phase was metal. He and Ive replaced the curvy plastic PowerBook G3 with the sleek titanium PowerBook G4, which they redesigned two years later in aluminum, as if just to demonstrate how much they liked different metals. Then they did an iMac and an iPod Nano in anodized aluminum, which meant that the metal had been put in an acid bath and electrified so that its surface oxidized. Jobs was told it could not be done in the quantities they needed, so he had a factory built in China to handle it. Ive went there, during the SARS epidemic, to oversee the process. ¡°I stayed for three months in a dormitory to work on the process,¡± he recalled. ¡°Ruby and others said it would be impossible, but I wanted to do it because Steve and I felt that the anodized aluminum had a real integrity to it.¡±

Next was glass. ¡°After we did metal, I looked at Jony and said that we had to master glass,¡± said Jobs. For the Apple stores, they had created huge windowpanes and glass stairs. For the iPhone, the original plan was for it to have a plastic screen, like the iPod. But Jobs decided it would feel much more elegant and substantive if the screens were glass. So he set about finding a glass that would be strong and resistant to scratches.

The natural place to look was Asia, where the glass for the stores was being made. But Jobs¡¯s friend John Seeley Brown, who was on the board of Corning Glass in Upstate New York, told him that he should talk to that company¡¯s young and dynamic CEO, Wendell Weeks. So he dialed the main Corning switchboard number and asked to be put through to Weeks. He got an assistant, who offered to pass along the message. ¡°No, I¡¯m Steve Jobs,¡± he replied. ¡°Put me through.¡± The assistant refused. Jobs called Brown and complained that he had been subjected to ¡°typical East Coast bullshit.¡± When Weeks heard that, he called the main Apple switchboard and asked to speak to Jobs. He was told to put his request in writing and send it in by fax. When Jobs was told what happened, he took a liking to Weeks and invited him to Cupertino.

Jobs described the type of glass Apple wanted for the iPhone, and Weeks told him that Corning had developed a chemical exchange process in the 1960s that led to what they dubbed ¡°gorilla glass.¡± It was incredibly strong, but it had never found a market, so Corning quit making it. Jobs said he doubted it was good enough, and he started explaining to Weeks how glass was made. This amused Weeks, who of course knew more than Jobs about that topic. ¡°Can you shut up,¡± Weeks interjected, ¡°and let me teach you some science?¡± Jobs was taken aback and fell silent. Weeks went to the whiteboard and gave a tutorial on the chemistry, which involved an ion-exchange process that produced a compression layer on the surface of the glass. This turned Jobs around, and he said he wanted as much gorilla glass as Corning could make within six months. ¡°We don¡¯t have the capacity,¡± Weeks replied. ¡°None of our plants make the glass now.¡±

¡°Don¡¯t be afraid,¡± Jobs replied. This stunned Weeks, who was good-humored and confident but not used to Jobs¡¯s reality distortion field. He tried to explain that a false sense of confidence would not overcome engineering challenges, but that was a premise that Jobs had repeatedly shown he didn¡¯t accept. He stared at Weeks unblinking. ¡°Yes, you can do it,¡± he said. ¡°Get your mind around it. You can do it.¡±

As Weeks retold this story, he shook his head in astonishment. ¡°We did it in under six months,¡± he said. ¡°We produced a glass that had never been made.¡± Corning¡¯s facility in Harrisburg, Kentucky, which had been making LCD displays, was converted almost overnight to make gorilla glass full-time. ¡°We put our best scientists and engineers on it, and we just made it work.¡± In his airy office, Weeks has just one framed memento on display. It¡¯s a message Jobs sent the day the iPhone came out: ¡°We couldn¡¯t have done it without you.¡±

The Design

On many of his major projects, such as the first Toy Story and the Apple store, Jobs pressed ¡°pause¡± as they neared completion and decided to make major revisions. That happened with the design of the iPhone as well. The initial design had the glass screen set into an aluminum case. One Monday morning Jobs went over to see Ive. ¡°I didn¡¯t sleep last night,¡± he said, ¡°because I realized that I just don¡¯t love it.¡± It was the most important product he had made since the first Macintosh, and it just didn¡¯t look right to him. Ive, to his dismay, instantly realized that Jobs was right. ¡°I remember feeling absolutely embarrassed that he had to make the observation.¡±

The problem was that the iPhone should have been all about the display, but in their current design the case competed with the display instead of getting out of the way. The whole device felt too masculine, task-driven, efficient. ¡°Guys, you¡¯ve killed yourselves over this design for the last nine months, but we¡¯re going to change it,¡± Jobs told Ive¡¯s team. ¡°We¡¯re all going to have to work nights and weekends, and if you want we can hand out some guns so you can kill us now.¡± Instead of balking, the team agreed. ¡°It was one of my proudest moments at Apple,¡± Jobs recalled.

The new design ended up with just a thin stainless steel bezel that allowed the gorilla glass display to go right to the edge. Every part of the device seemed to defer to the screen. The new look was austere, yet also friendly. You could fondle it. It meant they had to redo the circuit boards, antenna, and processor placement inside, but Jobs ordered the change. ¡°Other companies may have shipped,¡± said Fadell, ¡°but we pressed the reset button and started over.¡±

One aspect of the design, which reflected not only Jobs¡¯s perfectionism but also his desire to control, was that the device was tightly sealed. The case could not be opened, even to change the battery. As with the original Macintosh in 1984, Jobs did not want people fiddling inside. In fact when Apple discovered in 2011 that third-party repair shops were opening up the iPhone 4, it replaced the tiny screws with a tamper-resistant Pentalobe screw that was impossible to open with a commercially available screwdriver. By not having a replaceable battery, it was possible to make the iPhone much thinner. For Jobs, thinner was always better. ¡°He¡¯s always believed that thin is beautiful,¡± said Tim Cook. ¡°You can see that in all of the work. We have the thinnest notebook, the thinnest smartphone, and we made the iPad thin and then even thinner.¡±

The Launch

When it came time to launch the iPhone, Jobs decided, as usual, to grant a magazine a special sneak preview. He called John Huey, the editor in chief of Time Inc., and began with his typical superlative: ¡°This is the best thing we¡¯ve ever done.¡± He wanted to give Time the exclusive, ¡°but there¡¯s nobody smart enough at Time to write it, so I¡¯m going to give it to someone else.¡± Huey introduced him to Lev Grossman, a savvy technology writer (and novelist) at Time. In his piece Grossman correctly noted that the iPhone did not really invent many new features, it just made these features a lot more usable. ¡°But that¡¯s important. When our tools don¡¯t work, we tend to blame ourselves, for being too stupid or not reading the manual or having too-fat fingers. . . . When our tools are broken, we feel broken. And when somebody fixes one, we feel a tiny bit more whole.¡±

For the unveiling at the January 2007 Macworld in San Francisco, Jobs invited back Andy Hertzfeld, Bill Atkinson, Steve Wozniak, and the 1984 Macintosh team, as he had done when he launched the iMac. In a career of dazzling product presentations, this may have been his best. ¡°Every once in a while a revolutionary product comes along that changes everything,¡± he began. He referred to two earlier examples: the original Macintosh, which ¡°changed the whole computer industry,¡± and the first iPod, which ¡°changed the entire music industry.¡± Then he carefully built up to the product he was about to launch: ¡°Today, we¡¯re introducing three revolutionary products of this class. The first one is a widescreen iPod with touch controls. The second is a revolutionary mobile phone. And the third is a breakthrough Internet communications device.¡± He repeated the list for emphasis, then asked, ¡°Are you getting it? These are not three separate devices, this is one device, and we are calling it iPhone.¡±

When the iPhone went on sale five months later, at the end of June 2007, Jobs and his wife walked to the Apple store in Palo Alto to take in the excitement. Since he often did that on the day new products went on sale, there were some fans hanging out in anticipation, and they greeted him as they would have Moses if he had walked in to buy the Bible. Among the faithful were Hertzfeld and Atkinson. ¡°Bill stayed in line all night,¡± Hertzfeld said. Jobs waved his arms and started laughing. ¡°I sent him one,¡± he said. Hertzfeld replied, ¡°He needs six.¡±

The iPhone was immediately dubbed ¡°the Jesus Phone¡± by bloggers. But Apple¡¯s competitors emphasized that, at $500, it cost too much to be successful. ¡°It¡¯s the most expensive phone in the world,¡± Microsoft¡¯s Steve Ballmer said in a CNBC interview. ¡°And it doesn¡¯t appeal to business customers because it doesn¡¯t have a keyboard.¡± Once again Microsoft had underestimated Jobs¡¯s product. By the end of 2010, Apple had sold ninety million iPhones, and it reaped more than half of the total profits generated in the global cell phone market.

¡°Steve understands desire,¡± said Alan Kay, the Xerox PARC pioneer who had envisioned a ¡°Dynabook¡± tablet computer forty years earlier. Kay was good at making prophetic assessments, so Jobs asked him what he thought of the iPhone. ¡°Make the screen five inches by eight inches, and you¡¯ll rule the world,¡± Kay said. He did not know that the design of the iPhone had started with, and would someday lead to, ideas for a tablet computer that would fulfill¡ªindeed exceed¡ªhis vision for the Dynabook.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

ROUND TWO



The Cancer Recurs



The Battles of 2008

By the beginning of 2008 it was clear to Jobs and his doctors that his cancer was spreading. When they had taken out his pancreatic tumors in 2004, he had the cancer genome partially sequenced. That helped his doctors determine which pathways were broken, and they were treating him with targeted therapies that they thought were most likely to work.

He was also being treated for pain, usually with morphine-based analgesics. One day in February 2008 when Powell¡¯s close friend Kathryn Smith was staying with them in Palo Alto, she and Jobs took a walk. ¡°He told me that when he feels really bad, he just concentrates on the pain, goes into the pain, and that seems to dissipate it,¡± she recalled. That wasn¡¯t exactly true, however. When Jobs was in pain, he let everyone around him know it.

There was another health issue that became increasingly problematic, one that medical researchers didn¡¯t focus on as rigorously as they did cancer or pain. He was having eating problems and losing weight. Partly this was because he had lost much of his pancreas, which produces the enzymes needed to digest protein and other nutrients. It was also because both the cancer and the morphine reduced his appetite. And then there was the psychological component, which the doctors barely knew how to address: Since his early teens, he had indulged his weird obsession with extremely restrictive diets and fasts.

Even after he married and had children, he retained his dubious eating habits. He would spend weeks eating the same thing¡ªcarrot salad with lemon, or just apples¡ªand then suddenly spurn that food and declare that he had stopped eating it. He would go on fasts, just as he did as a teenager, and he became sanctimonious as he lectured others at the table on the virtues of whatever eating regimen he was following. Powell had been a vegan when they were first married, but after her husband¡¯s operation she began to diversify their family meals with fish and other proteins. Their son, Reed, who had been a vegetarian, became a ¡°hearty omnivore.¡± They knew it was important for his father to get diverse sources of protein.

The family hired a gentle and versatile cook, Bryar Brown, who once worked for Alice Waters at Chez Panisse. He came each afternoon and made a panoply of healthy offerings for dinner, which used the herbs and vegetables that Powell grew in their garden. When Jobs expressed any whim¡ªcarrot salad, pasta with basil, lemongrass soup¡ªBrown would quietly and patiently find a way to make it. Jobs had always been an extremely opinionated eater, with a tendency to instantly judge any food as either fantastic or terrible. He could taste two avocados that most mortals would find indistinguishable, and declare that one was the best avocado ever grown and the other inedible.

Beginning in early 2008 Jobs¡¯s eating disorders got worse. On some nights he would stare at the floor and ignore all of the dishes set out on the long kitchen table. When others were halfway through their meal, he would abruptly get up and leave, saying nothing. It was stressful for his family. They watched him lose forty pounds during the spring of 2008.

His health problems became public again in March 2008, when Fortune published a piece called ¡°The Trouble with Steve Jobs.¡± It revealed that he had tried to treat his cancer with diets for nine months and also investigated his involvement in the backdating of Apple stock options. As the story was being prepared, Jobs invited¡ªsummoned¡ªFortune¡¯s managing editor Andy Serwer to Cupertino to pressure him to spike it. He leaned into Serwer¡¯s face and asked, ¡°So, you¡¯ve uncovered the fact that I¡¯m an asshole. Why is that news?¡± Jobs made the same rather self-aware argument when he called Serwer¡¯s boss at Time Inc., John Huey, from a satellite phone he brought to Hawaii¡¯s Kona Village. He offered to convene a panel of fellow CEOs and be part of a discussion about what health issues are proper to disclose, but only if Fortune killed its piece. The magazine didn¡¯t.

When Jobs introduced the iPhone 3G in June 2008, he was so thin that it overshadowed the product announcement. In Esquire Tom Junod described the ¡°withered¡± figure onstage as being ¡°gaunt as a pirate, dressed in what had heretofore been the vestments of his invulnerability.¡± Apple released a statement saying, untruthfully, that his weight loss was the result of ¡°a common bug.¡± The following month, as questions persisted, the company released another statement saying that Jobs¡¯s health was ¡°a private matter.¡±

Joe Nocera of the New York Times wrote a column denouncing the handling of Jobs¡¯s health issues. ¡°Apple simply can¡¯t be trusted to tell the truth about its chief executive,¡± he wrote in late July. ¡°Under Mr. Jobs, Apple has created a culture of secrecy that has served it well in many ways¡ªthe speculation over which products Apple will unveil at the annual Macworld conference has been one of the company¡¯s best marketing tools. But that same culture poisons its corporate governance.¡± As he was writing the column and getting the standard ¡°a private matter¡± comment from all at Apple, he got an unexpected call from Jobs himself. ¡°This is Steve Jobs,¡± he began. ¡°You think I¡¯m an arrogant asshole who thinks he¡¯s above the law, and I think you¡¯re a slime bucket who gets most of his facts wrong.¡± After that rather arresting opening, Jobs offered up some information about his health, but only if Nocera would keep it off the record. Nocera honored the request, but he was able to report that, while Jobs¡¯s health problems amounted to more than a common bug, ¡°they weren¡¯t life-threatening and he doesn¡¯t have a recurrence of cancer.¡± Jobs had given Nocera more information than he was willing to give his own board and shareholders, but it was not the full truth.

Partly due to concern about Jobs¡¯s weight loss, Apple¡¯s stock price drifted from $188 at the beginning of June 2008 down to $156 at the end of July. Matters were not helped in late August when Bloomberg News mistakenly released its prepackaged obituary of Jobs, which ended up on Gawker. Jobs was able to roll out Mark Twain¡¯s famous quip a few days later at his annual music event. ¡°Reports of my death are greatly exaggerated,¡± he said, as he launched a line of new iPods. But his gaunt appearance was not reassuring. By early October the stock price had sunk to $97.

That month Doug Morris of Universal Music was scheduled to meet with Jobs at Apple. Instead Jobs invited him to his house. Morris was surprised to see him so ill and in pain. Morris was about to be honored at a gala in Los Angeles for City of Hope, which raised money to fight cancer, and he wanted Jobs to be there. Charitable events were something Jobs avoided, but he decided to do it, both for Morris and for the cause. At the event, held in a big tent on Santa Monica beach, Morris told the two thousand guests that Jobs was giving the music industry a new lease on life. The performances¡ªby Stevie Nicks, Lionel Richie, Erykah Badu, and Akon¡ªwent on past midnight, and Jobs had severe chills. Jimmy Iovine gave him a hooded sweatshirt to wear, and he kept the hood over his head all evening. ¡°He was so sick, so cold, so thin,¡± Morris recalled.

Fortune¡¯s veteran technology writer Brent Schlender was leaving the magazine that December, and his swan song was to be a joint interview with Jobs, Bill Gates, Andy Grove, and Michael Dell. It had been hard to organize, and just a few days before it was to happen, Jobs called to back out. ¡°If they ask why, just tell them I¡¯m an asshole,¡± he said. Gates was annoyed, then discovered what the health situation was. ¡°Of course, he had a very, very good reason,¡± said Gates. ¡°He just didn¡¯t want to say.¡± That became more apparent when Apple announced on December 16 that Jobs was canceling his scheduled appearance at the January Macworld, the forum he had used for big product launches for the past eleven years.

The blogosphere erupted with speculation about his health, much of which had the odious smell of truth. Jobs was furious and felt violated. He was also annoyed that Apple wasn¡¯t being more active in pushing back. So on January 5, 2009, he wrote and released a misleading open letter. He claimed that he was skipping Macworld because he wanted to spend more time with his family. ¡°As many of you know, I have been losing weight throughout 2008,¡± he added. ¡°My doctors think they have found the cause¡ªa hormone imbalance that has been robbing me of the proteins my body needs to be healthy. Sophisticated blood tests have confirmed this diagnosis. The remedy for this nutritional problem is relatively simple.¡±

There was a kernel of truth to this, albeit a small one. One of the hormones created by the pancreas is glucagon, which is the flip side of insulin. Glucagon causes your liver to release blood sugar. Jobs¡¯s tumor had metastasized into his liver and was wreaking havoc. In effect, his body was devouring itself, so his doctors gave him drugs to try to lower the glucagon level. He did have a hormone imbalance, but it was because his cancer had spread into his liver. He was in personal denial about this, and he also wanted to be in public denial. Unfortunately that was legally problematic, because he ran a publicly traded company. But Jobs was furious about the way the blogosphere was treating him, and he wanted to strike back.

He was very sick at this point, despite his upbeat statement, and also in excruciating pain. He had undertaken another round of cancer drug therapy, and it had grueling side effects. His skin started drying out and cracking. In his quest for alternative approaches, he flew to Basel, Switzerland, to try an experimental hormone-delivered radiotherapy. He also underwent an experimental treatment developed in Rotterdam known as peptide receptor radionuclide therapy.

After a week filled with increasingly insistent legal advice, Jobs finally agreed to go on medical leave. He made the announcement on January 14, 2009, in another open letter to the Apple staff. At first he blamed the decision on the prying of bloggers and the press. ¡°Unfortunately, the curiosity over my personal health continues to be a distraction not only for me and my family, but everyone else at Apple,¡± he said. But then he admitted that the remedy for his ¡°hormone imbalance¡± was not as simple as he had claimed. ¡°During the past week I have learned that my health-related issues are more complex than I originally thought.¡± Tim Cook would again take over daily operations, but Jobs said that he would remain CEO, continue to be involved in major decisions, and be back by June.

Jobs had been consulting with Bill Campbell and Art Levinson, who were juggling the dual roles of being his personal health advisors and also the co-lead directors of the company. But the rest of the board had not been as fully informed, and the shareholders had initially been misinformed. That raised some legal issues, and the SEC opened an investigation into whether the company had withheld ¡°material information¡± from shareholders. It would constitute security fraud, a felony, if the company had allowed the dissemination of false information or withheld true information that was relevant to the company¡¯s financial prospects. Because Jobs and his magic were so closely identified with Apple¡¯s comeback, his health seemed to meet this standard. But it was a murky area of the law; the privacy rights of the CEO had to be weighed. This balance was particularly difficult in the case of Jobs, who both valued his privacy and embodied his company more than most CEOs. He did not make the task easier. He became very emotional, both ranting and crying at times, when railing against anyone who suggested that he should be less secretive.

Campbell treasured his friendship with Jobs, and he didn¡¯t want to have any fiduciary duty to violate his privacy, so he offered to step down as a director. ¡°The privacy side is so important to me,¡± he later said. ¡°He¡¯s been my friend for about a million years.¡± The lawyers eventually determined that Campbell didn¡¯t need to resign from the board but that he should step aside as co-lead director. He was replaced in that role by Andrea Jung of Avon. The SEC investigation ended up going nowhere, and the board circled the wagons to protect Jobs from calls that he release more information. ¡°The press wanted us to blurt out more personal details,¡± recalled Al Gore. ¡°It was really up to Steve to go beyond what the law requires, but he was adamant that he didn¡¯t want his privacy invaded. His wishes should be respected.¡± When I asked Gore whether the board should have been more forthcoming at the beginning of 2009, when Jobs¡¯s health issues were far worse than shareholders were led to believe, he replied, ¡°We hired outside counsel to do a review of what the law required and what the best practices were, and we handled it all by the book. I sound defensive, but the criticism really pissed me off.¡±

One board member disagreed. Jerry York, the former CFO at Chrysler and IBM, did not say anything publicly, but he confided to a reporter at the Wall Street Journal, off the record, that he was ¡°disgusted¡± when he learned that the company had concealed Jobs¡¯s health problems in late 2008. ¡°Frankly, I wish I had resigned then.¡± When York died in 2010, the Journal put his comments on the record. York had also provided off-the-record information to Fortune, which the magazine used when Jobs went on his third health leave, in 2011.

Some at Apple didn¡¯t believe the quotes attributed to York were accurate, since he had not officially raised objections at the time. But Bill Campbell knew that the reports rang true; York had complained to him in early 2009. ¡°Jerry had a little more white wine than he should have late at night, and he would call at two or three in the morning and say, ¡®What the fuck, I¡¯m not buying that shit about his health, we¡¯ve got to make sure.¡¯ And then I¡¯d call him the next morning and he¡¯d say, ¡®Oh fine, no problem.¡¯ So on some of those evenings, I¡¯m sure he got raggy and talked to reporters.¡±

Memphis

The head of Jobs¡¯s oncology team was Stanford University¡¯s George Fisher, a leading researcher on gastrointestinal and colorectal cancers. He had been warning Jobs for months that he might have to consider a liver transplant, but that was the type of information that Jobs resisted processing. Powell was glad that Fisher kept raising the possibility, because she knew it would take repeated proddings to get her husband to consider the idea.

He finally became convinced in January 2009, just after he claimed his ¡°hormonal imbalance¡± could be treated easily. But there was a problem. He was put on the wait list for a liver transplant in California, but it became clear he would never get one there in time. The number of available donors with his blood type was small. Also, the metrics used by the United Network for Organ Sharing, which establishes policies in the United States, favored those suffering from cirrhosis and hepatitis over cancer patients.

There is no legal way for a patient, even one as wealthy as Jobs, to jump the queue, and he didn¡¯t. Recipients are chosen based on their MELD score (Model for End-Stage Liver Disease), which uses lab tests of hormone levels to determine how urgently a transplant is needed, and on the length of time they have been waiting. Every donation is closely audited, data are available on public websites (optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/), and you can monitor your status on the wait list at any time.

Powell became the troller of the organ-donation websites, checking in every night to see how many were on the wait lists, what their MELD scores were, and how long they had been on. ¡°You can do the math, which I did, and it would have been way past June before he got a liver in California, and the doctors felt that his liver would give out in about April,¡± she recalled. So she started asking questions and discovered that it was permissible to be on the list in two different states at the same time, which is something that about 3% of potential recipients do. Such multiple listing is not discouraged by policy, even though critics say it favors the rich, but it is difficult. There were two major requirements: The potential recipient had to be able to get to the chosen hospital within eight hours, which Jobs could do thanks to his plane, and the doctors from that hospital had to evaluate the patient in person before adding him or her to the list.

George Riley, the San Francisco lawyer who often served as Apple¡¯s outside counsel, was a caring Tennessee gentleman, and he had become close to Jobs. His parents had both been doctors at Methodist University Hospital in Memphis, he was born there, and he was a friend of James Eason, who ran the transplant institute there. Eason¡¯s unit was one of the best and busiest in the nation; in 2008 he and his team did 121 liver transplants. He had no problem allowing people from elsewhere to multiple-list in Memphis. ¡°It¡¯s not gaming the system,¡± he said. ¡°It¡¯s people choosing where they want their health care. Some people would leave Tennessee to go to California or somewhere else to seek treatment. Now we have people coming from California to Tennessee.¡± Riley arranged for Eason to fly to Palo Alto and conduct the required evaluation there.

By late February 2009 Jobs had secured a place on the Tennessee list (as well as the one in California), and the nervous waiting began. He was declining rapidly by the first week in March, and the waiting time was projected to be twenty-one days. ¡°It was dreadful,¡± Powell recalled. ¡°It didn¡¯t look like we would make it in time.¡± Every day became more excruciating. He moved up to third on the list by mid-March, then second, and finally first. But then days went by. The awful reality was that upcoming events like St. Patrick¡¯s Day and March Madness (Memphis was in the 2009 tournament and was a regional site) offered a greater likelihood of getting a donor because the drinking causes a spike in car accidents.

Indeed, on the weekend of March 21, 2009, a young man in his midtwenties was killed in a car crash, and his organs were made available. Jobs and his wife flew to Memphis, where they landed just before 4 a.m. and were met by Eason. A car was waiting on the tarmac, and everything was staged so that the admitting paperwork was done as they rushed to the hospital.

The transplant was a success, but not reassuring. When the doctors took out his liver, they found spots on the peritoneum, the thin membrane that surrounds internal organs. In addition, there were tumors throughout the liver, which meant it was likely that the cancer had migrated elsewhere as well. It had apparently mutated and grown quickly. They took samples and did more genetic mapping.
