
He abruptly got out of his chair, looking a bit weak but smiling. ¡°I¡¯ve got to go have a massage now,¡± he said. ¡°Get to work.¡±

So Vincent and Milner, along with the copywriter Eric Grunbaum, began crafting what they dubbed ¡°The Manifesto.¡± It would be fast-paced, with vibrant pictures and a thumping beat, and it would proclaim that the iPad was revolutionary. The music they chose was Karen O¡¯s pounding refrain from the Yeah Yeah Yeahs¡¯¡± Gold Lion.¡± As the iPad was shown doing magical things, a strong voice declared, ¡°iPad is thin. iPad is beautiful. . . . It¡¯s crazy powerful. It¡¯s magical. . . . It¡¯s video, photos. More books than you could read in a lifetime. It¡¯s already a revolution, and it¡¯s only just begun.¡±

Once the Manifesto ads had run their course, the team again tried something softer, shot as day-in-the-life documentaries by the young filmmaker Jessica Sanders. Jobs liked them¡ªfor a little while. Then he turned against them for the same reason he had reacted against the original Pottery Barn¨Cstyle ads. ¡°Dammit,¡± he shouted, ¡°they look like a Visa commercial, typical ad agency stuff.¡±

He had been asking for ads that were different and new, but eventually he realized he did not want to stray from what he considered the Apple voice. For him, that voice had a distinctive set of qualities: simple, declarative, clean. ¡°We went down that lifestyle path, and it seemed to be growing on Steve, and suddenly he said, ¡®I hate that stuff, it¡¯s not Apple,¡¯¡± recalled Lee Clow. ¡°He told us to get back to the Apple voice. It¡¯s a very simple, honest voice.¡± And so they went back to a clean white background, with just a close-up showing off all the things that ¡°iPad is . . .¡± and could do.

Apps

The iPad commercials were not about the device, but about what you could do with it. Indeed its success came not just from the beauty of the hardware but from the applications, known as apps, that allowed you to indulge in all sorts of delightful activities. There were thousands¡ªand soon hundreds of thousands¡ªof apps that you could download for free or for a few dollars. You could sling angry birds with the swipe of your finger, track your stocks, watch movies, read books and magazines, catch up on the news, play games, and waste glorious amounts of time. Once again the integration of the hardware, software, and store made it easy. But the apps also allowed the platform to be sort of open, in a very controlled way, to outside developers who wanted to create software and content for it¡ªopen, that is, like a carefully curated and gated community garden.

The apps phenomenon began with the iPhone. When it first came out in early 2007, there were no apps you could buy from outside developers, and Jobs initially resisted allowing them. He didn¡¯t want outsiders to create applications for the iPhone that could mess it up, infect it with viruses, or pollute its integrity.

Board member Art Levinson was among those pushing to allow iPhone apps. ¡°I called him a half dozen times to lobby for the potential of the apps,¡± he recalled. If Apple didn¡¯t allow them, indeed encourage them, another smartphone maker would, giving itself a competitive advantage. Apple¡¯s marketing chief Phil Schiller agreed. ¡°I couldn¡¯t imagine that we would create something as powerful as the iPhone and not empower developers to make lots of apps,¡± he recalled. ¡°I knew customers would love them.¡± From the outside, the venture capitalist John Doerr argued that permitting apps would spawn a profusion of new entrepreneurs who would create new services.

Jobs at first quashed the discussion, partly because he felt his team did not have the bandwidth to figure out all of the complexities that would be involved in policing third-party app developers. He wanted focus. ¡°So he didn¡¯t want to talk about it,¡± said Schiller. But as soon as the iPhone was launched, he was willing to hear the debate. ¡°Every time the conversation happened, Steve seemed a little more open,¡± said Levinson. There were freewheeling discussions at four board meetings.

Jobs soon figured out that there was a way to have the best of both worlds. He would permit outsiders to write apps, but they would have to meet strict standards, be tested and approved by Apple, and be sold only through the iTunes Store. It was a way to reap the advantage of empowering thousands of software developers while retaining enough control to protect the integrity of the iPhone and the simplicity of the customer experience. ¡°It was an absolutely magical solution that hit the sweet spot,¡± said Levinson. ¡°It gave us the benefits of openness while retaining end-to-end control.¡±

The App Store for the iPhone opened on iTunes in July 2008; the billionth download came nine months later. By the time the iPad went on sale in April 2010, there were 185,000 available iPhone apps. Most could also be used on the iPad, although they didn¡¯t take advantage of the bigger screen size. But in less than five months, developers had written twenty-five thousand new apps that were specifically configured for the iPad. By July 2011 there were 500,000 apps for both devices, and there had been more than fifteen billion downloads of them.

The App Store created a new industry overnight. In dorm rooms and garages and at major media companies, entrepreneurs invented new apps. John Doerr¡¯s venture capital firm created an iFund of $200 million to offer equity financing for the best ideas. Magazines and newspapers that had been giving away their content for free saw one last chance to put the genie of that dubious business model back into the bottle. Innovative publishers created new magazines, books, and learning materials just for the iPad. For example, the high-end publishing house Callaway, which had produced books ranging from Madonna¡¯s Sex to Miss Spider¡¯s Tea Party, decided to ¡°burn the boats¡± and give up print altogether to focus on publishing books as interactive apps. By June 2011 Apple had paid out $2.5 billion to app developers.

The iPad and other app-based digital devices heralded a fundamental shift in the digital world. Back in the 1980s, going online usually meant dialing into a service like AOL, CompuServe, or Prodigy that charged fees for access to a carefully curated walled garden filled with content plus some exit gates that allowed braver users access to the Internet at large. The second phase, beginning in the early 1990s, was the advent of browsers that allowed everyone to freely surf the Internet using the hypertext transfer protocols of the World Wide Web, which linked billions of sites. Search engines arose so that people could easily find the websites they wanted. The release of the iPad portended a new model. Apps resembled the walled gardens of old. The creators could charge fees and offer more functions to the users who downloaded them. But the rise of apps also meant that the openness and linked nature of the web were sacrificed. Apps were not as easily linked or searchable. Because the iPad allowed the use of both apps and web browsing, it was not at war with the web model. But it did offer an alternative, for both the consumers and the creators of content.

Publishing and Journalism

With the iPod, Jobs had transformed the music business. With the iPad and its App Store, he began to transform all media, from publishing to journalism to television and movies.

Books were an obvious target, since Amazon¡¯s Kindle had shown there was an appetite for electronic books. So Apple created an iBooks Store, which sold electronic books the way the iTunes Store sold songs. There was, however, a slight difference in the business model. For the iTunes Store, Jobs had insisted that all songs be sold at one inexpensive price, initially 99 cents. Amazon¡¯s Jeff Bezos had tried to take a similar approach with ebooks, insisting on selling them for at most $9.99. Jobs came in and offered publishers what he had refused to offer record companies: They could set any price they wanted for their wares in the iBooks Store, and Apple would take 30%. Initially that meant prices were higher than on Amazon. Why would people pay Apple more? ¡°That won¡¯t be the case,¡± Jobs answered, when Walt Mossberg asked him that question at the iPad launch event. ¡°The price will be the same.¡± He was right.

The day after the iPad launch, Jobs described to me his thinking on books:

Amazon screwed it up. It paid the wholesale price for some books, but started selling them below cost at $9.99. The publishers hated that¡ªthey thought it would trash their ability to sell hardcover books at $28. So before Apple even got on the scene, some booksellers were starting to withhold books from Amazon. So we told the publishers, ¡°We¡¯ll go to the agency model, where you set the price, and we get our 30%, and yes, the customer pays a little more, but that¡¯s what you want anyway.¡± But we also asked for a guarantee that if anybody else is selling the books cheaper than we are, then we can sell them at the lower price too. So they went to Amazon and said, ¡°You¡¯re going to sign an agency contract or we¡¯re not going to give you the books.¡±



Jobs acknowledged that he was trying to have it both ways when it came to music and books. He had refused to offer the music companies the agency model and allow them to set their own prices. Why? Because he didn¡¯t have to. But with books he did. ¡°We were not the first people in the books business,¡± he said. ¡°Given the situation that existed, what was best for us was to do this akido move and end up with the agency model. And we pulled it off.¡±

Right after the iPad launch event, Jobs traveled to New York in February 2010 to meet with executives in the journalism business. In two days he saw Rupert Murdoch, his son James, and the management of their Wall Street Journal; Arthur Sulzberger Jr. and the top executives at the New York Times; and executives at Time, Fortune, and other Time Inc. magazines. ¡°I would love to help quality journalism,¡± he later said. ¡°We can¡¯t depend on bloggers for our news. We need real reporting and editorial oversight more than ever. So I¡¯d love to find a way to help people create digital products where they actually can make money.¡± Since he had gotten people to pay for music, he hoped he could do the same for journalism.

Publishers, however, turned out to be leery of his lifeline. It meant that they would have to give 30% of their revenue to Apple, but that wasn¡¯t the biggest problem. More important, the publishers feared that, under his system, they would no longer have a direct relationship with their subscribers; they wouldn¡¯t have their email address and credit card number so they could bill them, communicate with them, and market new products to them. Instead Apple would own the customers, bill them, and have their information in its own database. And because of its privacy policy, Apple would not share this information unless a customer gave explicit permission to do so.

Jobs was particularly interested in striking a deal with the New York Times, which he felt was a great newspaper in danger of declining because it had not figured out how to charge for digital content. ¡°One of my personal projects this year, I¡¯ve decided, is to try to help¡ªwhether they want it or not¡ªthe Times,¡± he told me early in 2010. ¡°I think it¡¯s important to the country for them to figure it out.¡±

During his New York trip, he went to dinner with fifty top Times executives in the cellar private dining room at Pranna, an Asian restaurant. (He ordered a mango smoothie and a plain vegan pasta, neither of which was on the menu.) There he showed off the iPad and explained how important it was to find a modest price point for digital content that consumers would accept. He drew a chart of possible prices and volume. How many readers would they have if the Times were free? They already knew the answer to that extreme on the chart, because they were giving it away for free on the web already and had about twenty million regular visitors. And if they made it really expensive? They had data on that too; they charged print subscribers more than $300 a year and had about a million of them. ¡°You should go after the midpoint, which is about ten million digital subscribers,¡± he told them. ¡°And that means your digital subs should be very cheap and simple, one click and $5 a month at most.¡±

When one of the Times circulation executives insisted that the paper needed the email and credit card information for all of its subscribers, even if they subscribed through the App Store, Jobs said that Apple would not give it out. That angered the executive. It was unthinkable, he said, for the Times not to have that information. ¡°Well, you can ask them for it, but if they won¡¯t voluntarily give it to you, don¡¯t blame me,¡± Jobs said. ¡°If you don¡¯t like it, don¡¯t use us. I¡¯m not the one who got you in this jam. You¡¯re the ones who¡¯ve spent the past five years giving away your paper online and not collecting anyone¡¯s credit card information.¡±

Jobs also met privately with Arthur Sulzberger Jr. ¡°He¡¯s a nice guy, and he¡¯s really proud of his new building, as he should be,¡± Jobs said later. ¡°I talked to him about what I thought he ought to do, but then nothing happened.¡± It took a year, but in April 2011 the Times started charging for its digital edition and selling some subscriptions through Apple, abiding by the policies that Jobs established. It did, however, decide to charge approximately four times the $5 monthly charge that Jobs had suggested.

At the Time-Life Building, Time¡¯s editor Rick Stengel played host. Jobs liked Stengel, who had assigned a talented team led by Josh Quittner to make a robust iPad version of the magazine each week. But he was upset to see Andy Serwer of Fortune there. Tearing up, he told Serwer how angry he still was about Fortune¡¯s story two years earlier revealing details of his health and the stock options problems. ¡°You kicked me when I was down,¡± he said.

The bigger problem at Time Inc. was the same as the one at the Times: The magazine company did not want Apple to own its subscribers and prevent it from having a direct billing relationship. Time Inc. wanted to create apps that would direct readers to its own website in order to buy a subscription. Apple refused. When Time and other magazines submitted apps that did this, they were denied the right to be in the App Store.

Jobs tried to negotiate personally with the CEO of Time Warner, Jeff Bewkes, a savvy pragmatist with a no-bullshit charm to him. They had dealt with each other a few years earlier over video rights for the iPod Touch; even though Jobs had not been able to convince him to do a deal involving HBO¡¯s exclusive rights to show movies soon after their release, he admired Bewkes¡¯s straight and decisive style. For his part, Bewkes respected Jobs¡¯s ability to be both a strategic thinker and a master of the tiniest details. ¡°Steve can go readily from the overarching principals into the details,¡± he said.

When Jobs called Bewkes about making a deal for Time Inc. magazines on the iPad, he started off by warning that the print business ¡°sucks,¡± that ¡°nobody really wants your magazines,¡± and that Apple was offering a great opportunity to sell digital subscriptions, but ¡°your guys don¡¯t get it.¡± Bewkes didn¡¯t agree with any of those premises. He said he was happy for Apple to sell digital subscriptions for Time Inc. Apple¡¯s 30% take was not the problem. ¡°I¡¯m telling you right now, if you sell a sub for us, you can have 30%,¡± Bewkes told him.

¡°Well, that¡¯s more progress than I¡¯ve made with anybody,¡± Jobs replied.

¡°I have only one question,¡± Bewkes continued. ¡°If you sell a subscription to my magazine, and I give you the 30%, who has the subscription¡ªyou or me?¡±

¡°I can¡¯t give away all the subscriber info because of Apple¡¯s privacy policy,¡± Jobs replied.

¡°Well, then, we have to figure something else out, because I don¡¯t want my whole subscription base to become subscribers of yours, for you to then aggregate at the Apple store,¡± said Bewkes. ¡°And the next thing you¡¯ll do, once you have a monopoly, is come back and tell me that my magazine shouldn¡¯t be $4 a copy but instead should be $1. If someone subscribes to our magazine, we need to know who it is, we need to be able to create online communities of those people, and we need the right to pitch them directly about renewing.¡±

Jobs had an easier time with Rupert Murdoch, whose News Corp. owned the Wall Street Journal, New York Post, newspapers around the world, Fox Studios, and the Fox News Channel. When Jobs met with Murdoch and his team, they also pressed the case that they should share ownership of the subscribers that came in through the App Store. But when Jobs refused, something interesting happened. Murdoch is not known as a pushover, but he knew that he did not have the leverage on this issue, so he accepted Jobs¡¯s terms. ¡°We would prefer to own the subscribers, and we pushed for that,¡± recalled Murdoch. ¡°But Steve wouldn¡¯t do a deal on those terms, so I said, ¡®Okay, let¡¯s get on with it.¡¯ We didn¡¯t see any reason to mess around. He wasn¡¯t going to bend¡ªand I wouldn¡¯t have bent if I were in his position¡ªso I just said yes.¡±

Murdoch even launched a digital-only daily newspaper, The Daily, tailored specifically for the iPad. It would be sold in the App Store, on the terms dictated by Jobs, at 99 cents a week. Murdoch himself took a team to Cupertino to show the proposed design. Not surprisingly, Jobs hated it. ¡°Would you allow our designers to help?¡± he asked. Murdoch accepted. ¡°The Apple designers had a crack at it,¡± Murdoch recalled, ¡°and our folks went back and had another crack, and ten days later we went back and showed them both, and he actually liked our team¡¯s version better. It stunned us.¡±

The Daily, which was neither tabloidy nor serious, but instead a rather midmarket product like USA Today, was not very successful. But it did help create an odd-couple bonding between Jobs and Murdoch. When Murdoch asked him to speak at his June 2010 News Corp. annual management retreat, Jobs made an exception to his rule of never doing such appearances. James Murdoch led him in an after-dinner interview that lasted almost two hours. ¡°He was very blunt and critical of what newspapers were doing in technology,¡± Murdoch recalled. ¡°He told us we were going to find it hard to get things right, because you¡¯re in New York, and anyone who¡¯s any good at tech works in Silicon Valley.¡± This did not go down very well with the president of the Wall Street Journal Digital Network, Gordon McLeod, who pushed back a bit. At the end, McLeod came up to Jobs and said, ¡°Thanks, it was a wonderful evening, but you probably just cost me my job.¡± Murdoch chuckled a bit when he described the scene to me. ¡°It ended up being true,¡± he said. McLeod was out within three months.

In return for speaking at the retreat, Jobs got Murdoch to hear him out on Fox News, which he believed was destructive, harmful to the nation, and a blot on Murdoch¡¯s reputation. ¡°You¡¯re blowing it with Fox News,¡± Jobs told him over dinner. ¡°The axis today is not liberal and conservative, the axis is constructive-destructive, and you¡¯ve cast your lot with the destructive people. Fox has become an incredibly destructive force in our society. You can be better, and this is going to be your legacy if you¡¯re not careful.¡± Jobs said he thought Murdoch did not really like how far Fox had gone. ¡°Rupert¡¯s a builder, not a tearer-downer,¡± he said. ¡°I¡¯ve had some meetings with James, and I think he agrees with me. I can just tell.¡±

Murdoch later said he was used to people like Jobs complaining about Fox. ¡°He¡¯s got sort of a left-wing view on this,¡± he said. Jobs asked him to have his folks make a reel of a week of Sean Hannity and Glenn Beck shows¡ªhe thought that they were more destructive than Bill O¡¯Reilly¡ªand Murdoch agreed to do so. Jobs later told me that he was going to ask Jon Stewart¡¯s team to put together a similar reel for Murdoch to watch. ¡°I¡¯d be happy to see it,¡± Murdoch said, ¡°but he hasn¡¯t sent it to me.¡±

Murdoch and Jobs hit it off well enough that Murdoch went to his Palo Alto house for dinner twice more during the next year. Jobs joked that he had to hide the dinner knives on such occasions, because he was afraid that his liberal wife was going to eviscerate Murdoch when he walked in. For his part, Murdoch was reported to have uttered a great line about the organic vegan dishes typically served: ¡°Eating dinner at Steve¡¯s is a great experience, as long as you get out before the local restaurants close.¡± Alas, when I asked Murdoch if he had ever said that, he didn¡¯t recall it.

One visit came early in 2011. Murdoch was due to pass through Palo Alto on February 24, and he texted Jobs to tell him so. He didn¡¯t know it was Jobs¡¯s fifty-sixth birthday, and Jobs didn¡¯t mention it when he texted back inviting him to dinner. ¡°It was my way of making sure Laurene didn¡¯t veto the plan,¡± Jobs joked. ¡°It was my birthday, so she had to let me have Rupert over.¡± Erin and Eve were there, and Reed jogged over from Stanford near the end of the dinner. Jobs showed off the designs for his planned boat, which Murdoch thought looked beautiful on the inside but ¡°a bit plain¡± on the outside. ¡°It certainly shows great optimism about his health that he was talking so much about building it,¡± Murdoch later said.

At dinner they talked about the importance of infusing an entrepreneurial and nimble culture into a company. Sony failed to do that, Murdoch said. Jobs agreed. ¡°I used to believe that a really big company couldn¡¯t have a clear corporate culture,¡± Jobs said. ¡°But I now believe it can be done. Murdoch¡¯s done it. I think I¡¯ve done it at Apple.¡±

Most of the dinner conversation was about education. Murdoch had just hired Joel Klein, the former chancellor of the New York City Department of Education, to start a digital curriculum division. Murdoch recalled that Jobs was somewhat dismissive of the idea that technology could transform education. But Jobs agreed with Murdoch that the paper textbook business would be blown away by digital learning materials.

In fact Jobs had his sights set on textbooks as the next business he wanted to transform. He believed it was an $8 billion a year industry ripe for digital destruction. He was also struck by the fact that many schools, for security reasons, don¡¯t have lockers, so kids have to lug a heavy backpack around. ¡°The iPad would solve that,¡± he said. His idea was to hire great textbook writers to create digital versions, and make them a feature of the iPad. In addition, he held meetings with the major publishers, such as Pearson Education, about partnering with Apple. ¡°The process by which states certify textbooks is corrupt,¡± he said. ¡°But if we can make the textbooks free, and they come with the iPad, then they don¡¯t have to be certified. The crappy economy at the state level will last for a decade, and we can give them an opportunity to circumvent that whole process and save money.¡±



CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE

NEW BATTLES



And Echoes of Old Ones



Google: Open versus Closed

A few days after he unveiled the iPad in January 2010, Jobs held a ¡°town hall¡± meeting with employees at Apple¡¯s campus. Instead of exulting about their transformative new product, however, he went into a rant against Google for producing the rival Android operating system. Jobs was furious that Google had decided to compete with Apple in the phone business. ¡°We did not enter the search business,¡± he said. ¡°They entered the phone business. Make no mistake. They want to kill the iPhone. We won¡¯t let them.¡± A few minutes later, after the meeting moved on to another topic, Jobs returned to his tirade to attack Google¡¯s famous values slogan. ¡°I want to go back to that other question first and say one more thing. This ¡®Don¡¯t be evil¡¯ mantra, it¡¯s bullshit.¡±

Jobs felt personally betrayed. Google¡¯s CEO Eric Schmidt had been on the Apple board during the development of the iPhone and iPad, and Google¡¯s founders, Larry Page and Sergey Brin, had treated him as a mentor. He felt ripped off. Android¡¯s touchscreen interface was adopting more and more of the features¡ªmulti-touch, swiping, a grid of app icons¡ªthat Apple had created.

Jobs had tried to dissuade Google from developing Android. He had gone to Google¡¯s headquarters near Palo Alto in 2008 and gotten into a shouting match with Page, Brin, and the head of the Android development team, Andy Rubin. (Because Schmidt was then on the Apple board, he recused himself from discussions involving the iPhone.) ¡°I said we would, if we had good relations, guarantee Google access to the iPhone and guarantee it one or two icons on the home screen,¡± he recalled. But he also threatened that if Google continued to develop Android and used any iPhone features, such as multi-touch, he would sue. At first Google avoided copying certain features, but in January 2010 HTC introduced an Android phone that boasted multi-touch and many other aspects of the iPhone¡¯s look and feel. That was the context for Jobs¡¯s pronouncement that Google¡¯s ¡°Don¡¯t be evil¡± slogan was ¡°bullshit.¡±

So Apple filed suit against HTC (and, by extension, Android), alleging infringement of twenty of its patents. Among them were patents covering various multi-touch gestures, swipe to open, double-tap to zoom, pinch and expand, and the sensors that determined how a device was being held. As he sat in his house in Palo Alto the week the lawsuit was filed, he became angrier than I had ever seen him:

Our lawsuit is saying, ¡°Google, you fucking ripped off the iPhone, wholesale ripped us off.¡± Grand theft. I will spend my last dying breath if I need to, and I will spend every penny of Apple¡¯s $40 billion in the bank, to right this wrong. I¡¯m going to destroy Android, because it¡¯s a stolen product. I¡¯m willing to go to thermonuclear war on this. They are scared to death, because they know they are guilty. Outside of Search, Google¡¯s products¡ªAndroid, Google Docs¡ªare shit.



A few days after this rant, Jobs got a call from Schmidt, who had resigned from the Apple board the previous summer. He suggested they get together for coffee, and they met at a caf¨¦ in a Palo Alto shopping center. ¡°We spent half the time talking about personal matters, then half the time on his perception that Google had stolen Apple¡¯s user interface designs,¡± recalled Schmidt. When it came to the latter subject, Jobs did most of the talking. Google had ripped him off, he said in colorful language. ¡°We¡¯ve got you red-handed,¡± he told Schmidt. ¡°I¡¯m not interested in settling. I don¡¯t want your money. If you offer me $5 billion, I won¡¯t want it. I¡¯ve got plenty of money. I want you to stop using our ideas in Android, that¡¯s all I want.¡± They resolved nothing.

Underlying the dispute was an even more fundamental issue, one that had unnerving historical resonance. Google presented Android as an ¡°open¡± platform; its open-source code was freely available for multiple hardware makers to use on whatever phones or tablets they built. Jobs, of course, had a dogmatic belief that Apple should closely integrate its operating systems with its hardware. In the 1980s Apple had not licensed out its Macintosh operating system, and Microsoft eventually gained dominant market share by licensing its system to multiple hardware makers and, in Jobs¡¯s mind, ripping off Apple¡¯s interface.

The comparison between what Microsoft wrought in the 1980s and what Google was trying to do in 2010 was not exact, but it was close enough to be unsettling¡ªand infuriating. It exemplified the great debate of the digital age: closed versus open, or as Jobs framed it, integrated versus fragmented. Was it better, as Apple believed and as Jobs¡¯s own controlling perfectionism almost compelled, to tie the hardware and software and content handling into one tidy system that assured a simple user experience? Or was it better to give users and manufacturers more choice and free up avenues for more innovation, by creating software systems that could be modified and used on different devices? ¡°Steve has a particular way that he wants to run Apple, and it¡¯s the same as it was twenty years ago, which is that Apple is a brilliant innovator of closed systems,¡± Schmidt later told me. ¡°They don¡¯t want people to be on their platform without permission. The benefits of a closed platform is control. But Google has a specific belief that open is the better approach, because it leads to more options and competition and consumer choice.¡±

So what did Bill Gates think as he watched Jobs, with his closed strategy, go into battle against Google, as he had done against Microsoft twenty-five years earlier? ¡°There are some benefits to being more closed, in terms of how much you control the experience, and certainly at times he¡¯s had the benefit of that,¡± Gates told me. But refusing to license the Apple iOS, he added, gave competitors like Android the chance to gain greater volume. In addition, he argued, competition among a variety of devices and manufacturers leads to greater consumer choice and more innovation. ¡°These companies are not all building pyramids next to Central Park,¡± he said, poking fun at Apple¡¯s Fifth Avenue store, ¡°but they are coming up with innovations based on competing for consumers.¡± Most of the improvements in PCs, Gates pointed out, came because consumers had a lot of choices, and that would someday be the case in the world of mobile devices. ¡°Eventually, I think, open will succeed, but that¡¯s where I come from. In the long run, the coherence thing, you can¡¯t stay with that.¡±

Jobs believed in ¡°the coherence thing.¡± His faith in a controlled and closed environment remained unwavering, even as Android gained market share. ¡°Google says we exert more control than they do, that we are closed and they are open,¡± he railed when I told him what Schmidt had said. ¡°Well, look at the results¡ªAndroid¡¯s a mess. It has different screen sizes and versions, over a hundred permutations.¡± Even if Google¡¯s approach might eventually win in the marketplace, Jobs found it repellent. ¡°I like being responsible for the whole user experience. We do it not to make money. We do it because we want to make great products, not crap like Android.¡±

Flash, the App Store, and Control

Jobs¡¯s insistence on end-to-end control was manifested in other battles as well. At the town hall meeting where he attacked Google, he also assailed Adobe¡¯s multimedia platform for websites, Flash, as a ¡°buggy¡± battery hog made by ¡°lazy¡± people. The iPod and iPhone, he said, would never run Flash. ¡°Flash is a spaghetti-ball piece of technology that has lousy performance and really bad security problems,¡± he said to me later that week.

He even banned apps that made use of a compiler created by Adobe that translated Flash code so that it would be compatible with Apple¡¯s iOS. Jobs disdained the use of compilers that allowed developers to write their products once and have them ported to multiple operating systems. ¡°Allowing Flash to be ported across platforms means things get dumbed down to the lowest common denominator,¡± he said. ¡°We spend lots of effort to make our platform better, and the developer doesn¡¯t get any benefit if Adobe only works with functions that every platform has. So we said that we want developers to take advantage of our better features, so that their apps work better on our platform than they work on anybody else¡¯s.¡± On that he was right. Losing the ability to differentiate Apple¡¯s platforms¡ªallowing them to become commoditized like HP and Dell machines¡ªwould have meant death for the company.

There was, in addition, a more personal reason. Apple had invested in Adobe in 1985, and together the two companies had launched the desktop publishing revolution. ¡°I helped put Adobe on the map,¡± Jobs claimed. In 1999, after he returned to Apple, he had asked Adobe to start making its video editing software and other products for the iMac and its new operating system, but Adobe refused. It focused on making its products for Windows. Soon after, its founder, John Warnock, retired. ¡°The soul of Adobe disappeared when Warnock left,¡± Jobs said. ¡°He was the inventor, the person I related to. It¡¯s been a bunch of suits since then, and the company has turned out crap.¡±

When Adobe evangelists and various Flash supporters in the blogosphere attacked Jobs for being too controlling, he decided to write and post an open letter. Bill Campbell, his friend and board member, came by his house to go over it. ¡°Does it sound like I¡¯m just trying to stick it to Adobe?¡± he asked Campbell. ¡°No, it¡¯s facts, just put it out there,¡± the coach said. Most of the letter focused on the technical drawbacks of Flash. But despite Campbell¡¯s coaching, Jobs couldn¡¯t resist venting at the end about the problematic history between the two companies. ¡°Adobe was the last major third party developer to fully adopt Mac OS X,¡± he noted.
